README.md, before:

# JsonDataExtractor

NOTE: This is still a very early beta.

Transform JSON data structures with the help of a simple schema and JsonPath expressions.
Use the JsonDataExtractor gem to extract and modify data from complex JSON structures using a
straightforward syntax
and a range of built-in or custom modifiers.

_Another try to make something for JSON that is XSLT for XML.
We transform one JSON into another JSON with the help of a third JSON!!!111!!eleventy!!_

Remap one JSON structure into another with some basic rules
and [jsonpath](https://github.com/joshbuddy/jsonpath).

Heavily inspired by [xml_data_extractor](https://github.com/monde-sistemas/xml_data_extractor).

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'json_data_extractor'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install json_data_extractor

## Usage

JsonDataExtractor allows you to remap one JSON structure into another with some basic rules
and [JSONPath](https://goessner.net/articles/JsonPath/) expressions. The process involves defining a
schema that maps the input JSON structure to the desired output structure.

We'll base our examples on the following source:

```json
{
  "store": {
    "book": [
      {
        "category": "reference",
        "author": "Nigel Rees",
        "title": "Sayings of the Century",
        "price": 8.95
      },
      {
        "category": "fiction",
        "author": "Evelyn Waugh",
        "title": "Sword of Honour",
        "price": 12.99
      },
      {
        "category": "fiction",
        "author": "Herman Melville",
        "title": "Moby Dick",
        "isbn": "0-553-21311-3",
        "price": 8.99
      },
      {
        "category": "fiction",
        "author": "J. R. R. Tolkien",
        "title": "The Lord of the Rings",
        "isbn": "0-395-19395-8",
        "price": 22.99
      }
    ],
    "bicycle": {
      "color": "red",
      "price": 19.95
    }
  }
}
```

### Defining a Schema

A schema consists of one or more mappings that specify how to extract data from the input JSON and
where to place it in the output JSON.

Each mapping has a path field that specifies the JsonPath expression to use for data extraction, and
an optional modifier field that specifies one or more modifiers to apply to the extracted data.
Modifiers are used to transform the data in some way before placing it in the output JSON.

Here's an example schema that extracts the authors and categories from a JSON structure similar to
the one used in the previous example:

```json
{
  "authors": {
    "path": "$.store.book[*].author",
    "modifier": "downcase"
  },
  "categories": "$..category"
}
```

The resulting json will be:

```json
{
  "authors": [
    "nigel rees",
    "evelyn waugh",
    "herman melville",
    "j. r. r. tolkien"
  ],
  "categories": [
    "reference",
    "fiction",
    "fiction",
    "fiction"
  ]
}

```

### Modifiers

Modifiers can be supplied on object creation and/or added later by calling `#add_modifier` method.
Please see specs for examples.
Modifiers allow you to perform transformations on the extracted data before it is returned. You can
use modifiers to clean up the data, format it, or apply any custom logic you need.

Modifiers can be defined in two ways: by providing a symbol corresponding to the name of the method
or lambda that should be called on each extracted value, or by providing an anonymous lambda. Here's
an example schema that uses both types of modifiers:

```ruby
schema = {
  name:  '$.name',
  age:   { path: '$.age', modifier: :to_i },
  email: { path: '$.contact.email', modifiers: [:downcase, lambda { |email| email.gsub(/\s/, '') }] }
}

```

In this schema, the name value is simply extracted as-is. The age value is extracted from the JSON,
but it is modified with the `to_i` method, which converts the value to an integer. The email value
is extracted from a nested object, and then passed through two modifiers: first `downcase` is called
to convert the email address to all lowercase letters, and then an anonymous lambda is called to
remove any whitespace in the email address.

You can also define custom modifiers by passing a lambda to the `add_modifier` method on a
JsonDataExtractor instance:

```ruby
extractor = JsonDataExtractor.new(json_data)
extractor.add_modifier(:remove_newlines) { |value| value.gsub("\n", '') }

schema = {
  name: 'name',
  bio:  { path: 'bio', modifiers: [:remove_newlines] }
}

results = extractor.extract(schema)

```

Modifiers are called in the order in which they are defined, so keep that in mind when defining your
schema. By default JDE raises an ArgumentError if a modifier is not applicable, but this behaviour
can be configured to ignore missing modifiers. See Configuration options for details

### Maps

The JsonDataExtractor gem provides a powerful feature called "maps" that allows you to transform
extracted data using predefined mappings. Maps are useful when you want to convert specific values
from the source data into different values based on predefined rules. The best use case is when you
need to traverse a complex tree to get to a value and them just convert it to your own disctionary.
E.g.:

```ruby
data = {
  cars: [
          { make: 'A', fuel: 1 },
          { make: 'B', fuel: 2 },
          { make: 'C', fuel: 3 },
          { make: 'D', fuel: nil },
        ]
}

FUEL_TYPES = { 1 => 'Petrol', 2 => 'Diesel', nil => 'Unknown' }
schema     = {
  fuel: {
    path: '$.cars[*].fuel',
    map:  FUEL_TYPES
  }
}
result     = JsonDataExtractor.new(data).extract(schema) # => {"fuel":["Petrol","Diesel",nil,"Unknown"]}
```

A map is essentially a dictionary that defines key-value pairs, where the keys represent the source
values and the corresponding values represent the transformed values. When extracting data, you can
apply one or multiple maps to modify the extracted values.

#### Syntax

To define a map, you can use the `map` or `maps` key in the schema. The map value can be a single
hash or an array of hashes, where each hash represents a separate mapping rule. Here's an example:

```ruby
{
  path: "$.data[*].category",
  map:  {
    "fruit"     => "Fresh Fruit",
    "vegetable" => "Organic Vegetable",
    "meat"      => "Premium Meat"
  },
}
```

Multiple maps can also be provided. In this case, each map is applied to the result of previous
transformation:

```ruby
{
  path: "$.data[*].category",
  maps: [
          {
            "fruit"     => "Fresh Fruit",
            "vegetable" => "Organic Vegetable",
            "meat"      => "Premium Meat",
          },
          {
            "Fresh Fruit"       => "Frisches Obst",
            "Organic Vegetable" => "Biologisches Gemüse",
            "Premium Meat"      => "Hochwertiges Fleisch",
          }
        ]
}
```

_(the example is a little bit silly, but you should get the idea of chaining maps)_

You can use keys `:map` and `:maps` interchangeably much like `:modifier`, `:modifiers`.

#### Notes

- Maps can be used together with modifiers but this has less sense as you can always apply complex
  mapping rules in modifiers themselves.
- If used together with modifiers, maps are applied **after** modifiers.
- If a map does not have a key corresponding to a transformed value, it will return nil, be careful
- Maps are applied in the order they are defined in the schema. Be cautious of the order if you have
  overlapping or conflicting mapping rules.

### Nested schemas

JDE supports nested schemas. Just provide your element with a type of `array` and add a `schema` key
for its data.

E.g. this is a valid real-life schema with nested data:

```json
{
  "name": "$.Name",
  "code": "$.Code",
  "services": "$.Services[*].Code",
  "locations": {
    "path": "$.Locations[*]",
    "type": "array",
    "schema": {
      "name": "$.Name",
      "type": "$.Type",
      "code": "$.Code"
    }
  }
}
```

Nested schema can be also applied to objects, not arrays. See specs for more examples.

## Configuration Options

The JsonDataExtractor gem provides a configuration option to control the behavior when encountering
invalid modifiers.

### Strict Modifiers

By default, the gem operates in strict mode, which means that if an invalid modifier is encountered,
an `ArgumentError` will be raised. This ensures that only valid modifiers are applied to the
extracted data.

To change this behavior and allow the use of invalid modifiers without raising an error, you can
configure the gem to operate in non-strict mode.

```ruby
JsonDataExtractor.configure do |config|
  config.strict_modifiers = false
end
```

When `strict_modifiers` is set to `false`, any invalid modifiers will be ignored, and the original
value will be returned without applying any modification.

It is important to note that enabling non-strict mode should be done with caution, as it can lead to
unexpected behavior if there are typos or incorrect modifiers specified in the schema.

By default, `strict_modifiers` is set to `true`, providing a safe and strict behavior. However, you
can customize this configuration option according to your specific needs.

## TODO

Update this readme for better usage cases. Add info on arrays and modifiers.

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run
the tests. You can
also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new
version, update the
version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag
for the version,
push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub
at https://github.com/austerlitz/json_data_extractor. This project
is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere
to
the [Contributor Covenant](http://contributor-covenant.org) code of conduct.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of
the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the JsonDataExtractor project’s codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and
mailing lists is
expected to follow
the [code of conduct](https://github.com/austerlitz/json_data_extractor/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

Commit message:

add nil path option and default values

README.md, after:

# JsonDataExtractor

NOTE: This is still a very early beta.

Transform JSON data structures with the help of a simple schema and JsonPath expressions.
Use the JsonDataExtractor gem to extract and modify data from complex JSON structures using a
straightforward syntax
and a range of built-in or custom modifiers.

_Another try to make something for JSON that is XSLT for XML.
We transform one JSON into another JSON with the help of a third JSON!!!111!!eleventy!!_

Remap one JSON structure into another with some basic rules
and [jsonpath](https://github.com/joshbuddy/jsonpath).

Heavily inspired by [xml_data_extractor](https://github.com/monde-sistemas/xml_data_extractor).

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'json_data_extractor'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install json_data_extractor

## Usage

JsonDataExtractor allows you to remap one JSON structure into another with some basic rules
and [JSONPath](https://goessner.net/articles/JsonPath/) expressions. The process involves defining a
schema that maps the input JSON structure to the desired output structure.

We'll base our examples on the following source:

```json
{
  "store": {
    "book": [
      {
        "category": "reference",
        "author": "Nigel Rees",
        "title": "Sayings of the Century",
        "price": 8.95
      },
      {
        "category": "fiction",
        "author": "Evelyn Waugh",
        "title": "Sword of Honour",
        "price": 12.99
      },
      {
        "category": "fiction",
        "author": "Herman Melville",
        "title": "Moby Dick",
        "isbn": "0-553-21311-3",
        "price": 8.99
      },
      {
        "category": "fiction",
        "author": "J. R. R. Tolkien",
        "title": "The Lord of the Rings",
        "isbn": "0-395-19395-8",
        "price": 22.99
      }
    ],
    "bicycle": {
      "color": "red",
      "price": 19.95
    }
  }
}
```

### Defining a Schema

A schema consists of one or more mappings that specify how to extract data from the input JSON and
where to place it in the output JSON.

Each mapping has a path field that specifies the JsonPath expression to use for data extraction, and
an optional modifier field that specifies one or more modifiers to apply to the extracted data.
Modifiers are used to transform the data in some way before placing it in the output JSON.

Here's an example schema that extracts the authors and categories from a JSON structure similar to
the one used in the previous example:

```json
{
  "authors": {
    "path": "$.store.book[*].author",
    "modifier": "downcase"
  },
  "categories": "$..category"
}
```

The resulting json will be:

```json
{
  "authors": [
    "nigel rees",
    "evelyn waugh",
    "herman melville",
    "j. r. r. tolkien"
  ],
  "categories": [
    "reference",
    "fiction",
    "fiction",
    "fiction"
  ]
}

```


### Handling Default Values

With JsonDataExtractor, you can specify default values in your schema for keys that might be absent in the input JSON. Use the `path` and `default` keys in the schema for this purpose.

```ruby
schema = {
  absent_value: { path: nil },
  default: { path: '$.some_real_path', default: 'foo' },
  default_with_lambda: { path: '$.table', default: -> { 'DEFAULT' } },
  absent_with_default: { path: nil, default: 'bar' }
}
```

- `absent_value`: Will be `nil` in the output as there's no corresponding key in the input JSON and no default is provided.
- `default`: Will either take the value from `$.some_real_path` in the input JSON or 'foo' if the path does not exist.
- `default_with_lambda`: Will take the value from `$..table` in the input JSON or 'DEFAULT' if the path does not exist.
- `absent_with_default`: Will be 'bar' in the output as there's no corresponding key in the input JSON but a default is provided.

#### Simplified Syntax for Absent Values

For keys that you expect to be absent in the input JSON but still want to include in the output with a `nil` value, you can use a simplified syntax by setting the schema value to `nil`.

```ruby
schema = {
  absent_value: nil
}
```

### Modifiers

Modifiers can be supplied on object creation and/or added later by calling `#add_modifier` method.
Please see specs for examples.
Modifiers allow you to perform transformations on the extracted data before it is returned. You can
use modifiers to clean up the data, format it, or apply any custom logic you need.

Modifiers can be defined in two ways: by providing a symbol corresponding to the name of the method
or lambda that should be called on each extracted value, or by providing an anonymous lambda. Here's
an example schema that uses both types of modifiers:

```ruby
schema = {
  name:  '$.name',
  age:   { path: '$.age', modifier: :to_i },
  email: { path: '$.contact.email', modifiers: [:downcase, lambda { |email| email.gsub(/\s/, '') }] }
}

```

In this schema, the name value is simply extracted as-is. The age value is extracted from the JSON,
but it is modified with the `to_i` method, which converts the value to an integer. The email value
is extracted from a nested object, and then passed through two modifiers: first `downcase` is called
to convert the email address to all lowercase letters, and then an anonymous lambda is called to
remove any whitespace in the email address.

You can also define custom modifiers by passing a lambda to the `add_modifier` method on a
JsonDataExtractor instance:

```ruby
extractor = JsonDataExtractor.new(json_data)
extractor.add_modifier(:remove_newlines) { |value| value.gsub("\n", '') }

schema = {
  name: 'name',
  bio:  { path: 'bio', modifiers: [:remove_newlines] }
}

results = extractor.extract(schema)

```

Modifiers are called in the order in which they are defined, so keep that in mind when defining your
schema. By default JDE raises an ArgumentError if a modifier is not applicable, but this behaviour
can be configured to ignore missing modifiers. See Configuration options for details

### Maps

The JsonDataExtractor gem provides a powerful feature called "maps" that allows you to transform
extracted data using predefined mappings. Maps are useful when you want to convert specific values
from the source data into different values based on predefined rules. The best use case is when you
need to traverse a complex tree to get to a value and them just convert it to your own disctionary.
E.g.:

```ruby
data = {
  cars: [
          { make: 'A', fuel: 1 },
          { make: 'B', fuel: 2 },
          { make: 'C', fuel: 3 },
          { make: 'D', fuel: nil },
        ]
}

FUEL_TYPES = { 1 => 'Petrol', 2 => 'Diesel', nil => 'Unknown' }
schema     = {
  fuel: {
    path: '$.cars[*].fuel',
    map:  FUEL_TYPES
  }
}
result     = JsonDataExtractor.new(data).extract(schema) # => {"fuel":["Petrol","Diesel",nil,"Unknown"]}
```

A map is essentially a dictionary that defines key-value pairs, where the keys represent the source
values and the corresponding values represent the transformed values. When extracting data, you can
apply one or multiple maps to modify the extracted values.

#### Syntax

To define a map, you can use the `map` or `maps` key in the schema. The map value can be a single
hash or an array of hashes, where each hash represents a separate mapping rule. Here's an example:

```ruby
{
  path: "$.data[*].category",
  map:  {
    "fruit"     => "Fresh Fruit",
    "vegetable" => "Organic Vegetable",
    "meat"      => "Premium Meat"
  },
}
```

Multiple maps can also be provided. In this case, each map is applied to the result of previous
transformation:

```ruby
{
  path: "$.data[*].category",
  maps: [
          {
            "fruit"     => "Fresh Fruit",
            "vegetable" => "Organic Vegetable",
            "meat"      => "Premium Meat",
          },
          {
            "Fresh Fruit"       => "Frisches Obst",
            "Organic Vegetable" => "Biologisches Gemüse",
            "Premium Meat"      => "Hochwertiges Fleisch",
          }
        ]
}
```

_(the example is a little bit silly, but you should get the idea of chaining maps)_

You can use keys `:map` and `:maps` interchangeably much like `:modifier`, `:modifiers`.

#### Notes

- Maps can be used together with modifiers but this has less sense as you can always apply complex
  mapping rules in modifiers themselves.
- If used together with modifiers, maps are applied **after** modifiers.
- If a map does not have a key corresponding to a transformed value, it will return nil, be careful
- Maps are applied in the order they are defined in the schema. Be cautious of the order if you have
  overlapping or conflicting mapping rules.

### Nested schemas

JDE supports nested schemas. Just provide your element with a type of `array` and add a `schema` key
for its data.

E.g. this is a valid real-life schema with nested data:

```json
{
  "name": "$.Name",
  "code": "$.Code",
  "services": "$.Services[*].Code",
  "locations": {
    "path": "$.Locations[*]",
    "type": "array",
    "schema": {
      "name": "$.Name",
      "type": "$.Type",
      "code": "$.Code"
    }
  }
}
```

Nested schema can be also applied to objects, not arrays. See specs for more examples.

## Configuration Options

The JsonDataExtractor gem provides a configuration option to control the behavior when encountering
invalid modifiers.

### Strict Modifiers

By default, the gem operates in strict mode, which means that if an invalid modifier is encountered,
an `ArgumentError` will be raised. This ensures that only valid modifiers are applied to the
extracted data.

To change this behavior and allow the use of invalid modifiers without raising an error, you can
configure the gem to operate in non-strict mode.

```ruby
JsonDataExtractor.configure do |config|
  config.strict_modifiers = false
end
```

When `strict_modifiers` is set to `false`, any invalid modifiers will be ignored, and the original
value will be returned without applying any modification.

It is important to note that enabling non-strict mode should be done with caution, as it can lead to
unexpected behavior if there are typos or incorrect modifiers specified in the schema.

By default, `strict_modifiers` is set to `true`, providing a safe and strict behavior. However, you
can customize this configuration option according to your specific needs.

## TODO

Update this readme for better usage cases. Add info on arrays and modifiers.

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run
the tests. You can
also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new
version, update the
version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag
for the version,
push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub
at https://github.com/austerlitz/json_data_extractor. This project
is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere
to
the [Contributor Covenant](http://contributor-covenant.org) code of conduct.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of
the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

## Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the JsonDataExtractor project’s codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and
mailing lists is
expected to follow
the [code of conduct](https://github.com/austerlitz/json_data_extractor/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
